************
Installation
************

Prerequisites
=============

pip and setuptools
------------------

Make sure you have the latest versions of `pip
<https://pip.pypa.io/en/stable/>`_ and `setuptools
<https://bitbucket.org/pypa/setuptools>`_  installed.

::

    $ pip --version

.. note::

    The package managers of most Linux/Unix distributions usually use outdated
    versions of :program:`pip`. Please uninstall the package providing
    :program:`pip` (usually it's named ``python-pip``) and :ref:`reinstall it
    using the bootstrap script <pip_bootstrap_script>`.

Install/upgrade pip using ensurepip
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

If you have Python 3.4 (or newer) or Python 2.7.9 (or newer) installed you can
use `ensurepip <https://docs.python.org/3/library/ensurepip.html>`_ to install
or upgrade :program:`pip`:

::

    $ python -m ensurepip --upgrade

If your Python version is too old you will simply see an error message like
that:

::

    $ python -m ensurepip --upgrade
    /usr/bin/python: No module named ensurepip

In this case :ref:`reinstall it using the bootstrap script
<pip_bootstrap_script>`.

.. _pip_bootstrap_script:

Install/upgrade pip using the bootstrap script
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

:program:`pip` can be installed with the help from a `bootstrap script
<https://bootstrap.pypa.io/get-pip.py>`_. If :program:`curl` is installed, you
can use it to download :program:`pip` at the command line. Otherwise just use
the browser.

::

    $ curl -O https://bootstrap.pypa.io/get-pip.py

When the bootstrap script has been downloaded execute it to install
:program:`pip`:

::

    $ python get-pip.py

virtualenvwrapper
-----------------

Make sure you have installed the latest version of `virtualenvwrapper
<https://virtualenvwrapper.readthedocs.org/>`_. You can use :program:`pip` to
either install or upgrade it:

::

    $ pip install -U virtualenvwrapper

.. note::

    If you installed :program:`virtualenvwrapper` for the first time, take your
    time to read the installation documentation.

pyenv
-----

This project will be tested with different Python versions. You should install
`pyenv <https://github.com/yyuu/pyenv>`_ to make the installation of different
Python versions as easy as possible.

Also install `pyenv-virtualenvwrapper <https://github.com/yyuu/pyenv-
virtualenvwrapper>`_, a :program:`pyenv` plugin which provides a
:program:`pyenv virtualenvwrapper` command to manage your virtualenvs with
virtualenvwrapper.

After you have installed and configured :program:`pyenv` and the plugin you can
use the following command in the root of the project to configure the Python
versions to use:

::

    $ pyenv local 3.4.3 2.7.9

.. note::

    You first have to install the Python versions you want to use using
    :program:`pyenv install`. :program:`pyenv install -l` lists all available
    versions.

    The first version passed to :program:`pyenv local` will be the main version
    used for the project.

PostgreSQL
----------

Check if PostgreSQL is installed:

::

    $ psql --version

If not, `download <http://www.postgresql.org/download/>`_ and install it for
your operating system.

EditorConfig
------------

`EditorConfig <http://editorconfig.org/>`_ helps developers define and maintain
consistent coding styles between different editors and IDEs. `Download a plugin
<http://editorconfig.org/#download>`_ for your favourite editor to enable it to
read the file format and adhere to the defined styles.

Development Setup
=================

Git and git-flow
----------------

Clone the repository using `Git <https://git-scm.com/>`_:

::

    $ git clone git@github.com:{{ cookiecutter.github_account }}/{{ cookiecutter.repo_name }}.git

Then change into the cloned repository:

::

    $ cd {{ cookiecutter.repo_name }}

We are using `git-flow <https://github.com/nvie/gitflow/>`_, a set of git
extensions for a branching model introduced by Vincent Driessen. You can read
more about it on `Vincent's blog
<http://nvie.com/posts/a-successful-git-branching-model/>`_, where you can also
find a `high-quality PDF illustrating the model
<http://nvie.com/files/Git-branching-model.pdf>`_. For your daily workflow
there also the `git-flow cheatsheet
<https://danielkummer.github.io/git-flow-cheatsheet/>`_ created by Daniel
Kummer, which is very helpful.

If you havn't installed git-flow, `do it now
<https://danielkummer.github.io/git-flow-cheatsheet/#setup>`_!

So the next step is to initialize your repository clone with git-flow. You can
choose the default for all questions being asked during the initialzaion
(simply press :kbd:`Enter` on every question):

::

    $ git-flow init

Install Python packages
-----------------------

First create a new virtualenv for the project using virtualenvwrapper:

::

    $ mkvirtualenv -a `pwd` {{ cookiecutter.repo_name }}

Now you can install the packages for development:

::

    $ make develop

You should run this command every time a requirement changes to update your
development environment.

Create the database
-------------------

Then create the new PostgreSQL user and database:

::

    $ make create-db-user
    $ make create-db

.. note::

    You may need to run :command:`make create-db-user` as a PostgreSQL superuser:

    ::

        $ sudo -u postgres make create-db-user

.. note::

    You may have to edit the PostgreSQL permissions in :file:`pg_hba.conf` by
    adding a line as follows after the ``postgres`` user line:

    ::

        local      {{ cookiecutter.repo_name }}   {{ cookiecutter.repo_name }}   md5

Now it's the time to create the database tables:

::

    $ make migrate

And to create a new Django superuser:

::

    $ envdir envs/dev/ python manage.py createsuperuser

Start the development webserver
-------------------------------

Finally start the development webserver:

::

    $ make runserver

To see the other targets available in the :file:`Makefile` simply run:

::

    $ make
